New in 0.12.0 (2021-07-15)
--------------------------

This release adds features for tighter integration with Pyro for model development, fixes for :class:`~scvi.external.SOLO`, and other enhancements. Users of :class:`~scvi.external.SOLO` are strongly encouraged to upgrade as previous bugs will affect performance.

Enchancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Add :class:`model.base.PyroSampleMixin` for easier posterior sampling with Pyro (`#1059`_).
- Add :class:`model.base.PyroSviTrainMixin` for automated training of Pyro models (`#1059`_).
- Ability to pass kwargs to :class:`~scvi.module.Classifier` when using :class:`~scvi.external.SOLO` (`#1078`_).
- Ability to get doublet predictions for simulated doublets in :class:`~scvi.external.SOLO` (`#1076`_).
- Add "comparison" column to differential expression results (`#1074`_).

Changes
~~~~~~~
- Update minimum Python version to `3.7.2` (`#1082`_).
- Use pandas read pickle function for pbmc dataset metadata loading (`#1099`_).
- Adds `n_samples_overall` parameter to functions for denoised expression/accesibility/etc. This is used in during differential expression (`#1090`_).

Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~
- Fix scale of library size for simulated doublets and expression in :class:`~scvi.external.SOLO` when using observed library size to train original :class:`~scvi.model.SCVI` model (`#1078`_, `#1085`_). Currently, library sizes in this case are not appropriately put on the log scale.
- Fix issue where anndata setup with a layer led to errors in :class:`~scvi.external.SOLO` (`#1098`_).
- Fix `adata` parameter of :func:`scvi.external.SOLO.from_scvi_model`, which previously did nothing (`#1078`_).
- Fix default `max_epochs` of :class:`~scvi.model.SCANVI` when initializing using pre-trained model of :class:`~scvi.model.SCVI` (`#1079`_).



Breaking changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
None!

Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~
- `@adamgayoso`_
- `@galenxing`_
- `@PierreBoyeau`_
- `@Munfred`_
- `@njbernstein`_
- `@vitkl`_


.. _`@Munfred`: https://github.com/Munfred
.. _`@adamgayoso`: https://github.com/adamgayoso
.. _`@galenxing`: https://github.com/galenxing
.. _`@PierreBoyeau`: https://github.com/PierreBoyeau
.. _`@njbernstein`: https://github.com/njbernstein
.. _`@vitkl`: https://github.com/vitkl


.. _`#1059`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1059
.. _`#1074`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1074
.. _`#1076`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1076
.. _`#1079`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1079
.. _`#1078`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1078
.. _`#1082`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1082
.. _`#1085`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1085
.. _`#1090`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1090
.. _`#1098`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1098
.. _`#1099`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1099


