New in 0.11.0 (2021-05-DD)
--------------------------

From the user perspective, this release features the new differential expression functionality (to be described in a manuscript). For now, it is accessible from :func:`~scvi.model.SCVI.differential_expression`. From the developer perspective, we made changes with respect to :class:`scvi.dataloaders.DataSplitter` and surrounding the Pyro backend. Finally, we also made changes to adapt our code to PyTorch Lightning version 1.3.

Changes
~~~~~~~
- Pass `n_labels` to :class:`~scvi.module.VAE` from :class`~scvi.model.SCVI` (`#1055`_).
- Require PyTorch lightning > 1.3, add relevant fixes (`#1054`_).
- Add DestVI reference (`#1060`_).
- Add PeakVI links to README (`#1046`_).
- Automatic delta and eps computation in differential expression (`#1043`_).
- Use PyTorch Lightning data modules for :class:`scvi.dataloaders.DataSplitter` (`#1061`_). This induces a breaking change in the way the data splitter is used. It is no longer callable and now has a `setup` method. See :class:`~scvi.train.TrainRunner` and its source code, which is straightforward.
- No longer require training plans to be initialized with `n_obs_training` argument (`#1061`_). `n_obs_training` is now a property that can be set before actual training to rescale the loss.
- Allow doublet ratio parameter to be changed for used in SOLO (`#1066`_).

Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~
- `@adamgayoso`_
- `@romain-lopez`_
- `@PierreBoyeau`_
- `@talashuach`_
- `@cataclysmus`_
- `@njbernstein`_

.. _`@cataclysmus`: https://github.com/cataclysmus
.. _`@adamgayoso`: https://github.com/adamgayoso
.. _`@PierreBoyeau`: https://github.com/PierreBoyeau
.. _`@talashuach`: https://github.com/talashuach
.. _`@njbernstein`: https://github.com/njbernstein

.. _`#1043`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1043
.. _`#1055`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1055
.. _`#1054`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1054
.. _`#1060`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1060
.. _`#1061`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1061
.. _`#1046`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1046
.. _`#1066`: https://github.com/YosefLab/scvi-tools/pull/1066


